[User manual] Contracts (#610)
tweag/nickel: doc/manual/contracts.md

# Contracts

(For the motivation behind contracts and a high-level overview of contracts and
types, first read the [correctness](./correctness.md) section.)

To first approximation, contracts are assertions. They check that a value
satisfies some property at run-time. If the test passes, the execution can go on
normally. Otherwise, an error is raised. In Nickel, you can apply a contract
using the `|` operator:

```nickel
let x = (1 + 1 | Num) in x
```

Contract can also be attached to identifiers in a definition:

```nickel
// let-binding: equivalent to the previous example
let x | Num = 1 + 1 in x

// on a record field
{x | Num = 1 + 1}
```

Here, `x` is bound to a `Num` contract. When evaluating `x`, the following steps
are performed:

1. Evaluate `1 + 1`.
2. Check that the result is a number.
3. If it is, return the expression unchanged. Otherwise, raise an error.

```
$nickel repl
nickel>1 + 1 | Num
2

nickel>"a" | Num
error: contract broken by a value.

> [..]

Author: My prompt is way fancier than that, so I faked this one. I guess I haven't used a simple `$` prompt for so long that I didn't remember there was a space here.

```

Contracts corresponding to the basic types `Num`, `Str`, `Bool` and `Dyn` are
available. `Dyn` is a contract that never fails.

## User-defined contracts

### By hand

> Having only the basic contracts would be quite limiting. The motivation for a

Author: Well, I meant if we only had basic contracts, and that's all. In any case that's not a wonderful section start, so I guess we can just get rid of it.

        | Str
        | default = "foo",
    bar | Num,
}
nickel>let config | MyConfig = {bar = 2}
nickel> builtins.serialize `Json config
"{
  "bar": 2,
  "foo": "foo"
}"
nickel>
nickel>:query config.foo
* contract: Str
* default: "foo"
* documentation: This documentation will propagate to the final value!
```

#### Open contracts

By default, contracts are closed, meaning that additional fields are forbidden:

```
nickel>let Contract = {foo | Str}
nickel>{foo = "a", bar = 1} | Contract
error: contract broken by a value [extra field `bar`].
[..]
```

If you want to allow additional fields, append `, ..` after the last field
definition to define an open contract:

```
nickel>let Contract = {foo | Str, ..}
nickel>{foo = "a", bar = 1} | Contract
{ foo = <contract,value="a">, bar = 1}
```

#### Giving values for fields

While most record contracts don't have field definitions, they can. In fact,
records contracts are not special: any record literal can be used both as a
contract or a normal value. If a field is defined both in the contract and the
checked value, the two definitions will be merged in the final result. For

> example:

Author: I don't recall such a discussion. Initially, inspired from CUE, contracts application was just merging, and there was thus no reason to reject specific records as record contracts. Then it appeared that while retaining some characteristics from merging was nice, record contract application also differed on some aspects, so it is now an asymmetric and slightly specialized version of merge, but it still doesn't impose any restriction on its operands.

> example:

Reviewer: I'm a little worried that this would lock us in a semantics that we don't know is useful or not. Whereas rejecting it would let us choose later based on experience. It's surprising that

```
{ foo | Int } | { foo = 0 }
```

will pass and and have field `foo = 0`.

The example that you show, however, is reasonable. But the **warning** section also highlights that it's all a little tricky.

I don't know…

> example:

Author: Initially it appeared to be useful to force a field to a fixed value, like in the example.

Now, I'm not so sure, because we could do that with contracts instead: `{foo | Eq 5 | default = 5}`. It's a bit more verbose, but it removes yet-another-way-of-doing-the-same-thing and fails with the usual blame error rather than a "non mergeable term" error (we could even imagine in the future that it's possible to use literals as contracts directly, as in Racket `{foo | 5 | default = 5}`, or even that a singleton contract automatically set a default value, and just write `{foo | 5}`, but I digress).

Plus the edge cases given in the documentation. So, I tend to think we may be better off by forbidding field definitions altogether. Should we do this right now?

error: contract broken by a value [extra field `bar`].
[..]

nickel>{sub_field.foo = "a", sub_field.bar = "b"} | ContractEq
{ sub_field = { foo = <contract,value="a">, bar = "b"}}
```

There are other discrepancies, e.g. when applying the contract to a record with
a `default` annotation on `subfield`. Thus, unless you have a specific use-case
in mind, **you should use `|` instead of `=` when attaching record contracts**.

### Types constructors for contracts

We've already seen that the primitive types `Num`, `Str` and `Bool` can be used
as contracts. In fact, any type constructor of the
[static type system](./typing.md) can be used to combine contracts.

#### List

A list contract checks that the value is a list and applies the parameter
contract to each element:

```
nickel>let VeryBig = contracts.from_predicate (fun value =>
  builtins.is_num value
  && value >= 1000)
nickel>[1000, 10001, 2] | List VeryBig
error: contract broken by a value.
  ┌─ :1:7
  │
1 │ List (VeryBig)
  │       ------- expected list element type
  │
  ┌─ repl-input-14:1:15
  │
1 │ [1000, 10001, 2] | List VeryBig
  │               - evaluated to this expression
[..]
```

> Recall that `List` is an alias for `List Dyn`, thus the `List` contracts only

Author: Yes. We'll have to fix existing documentation and code doing so, so I plan to butcher the stdlib (also removing those pesky `s` from modules like `lists` and `strings`) and make a big pass on everything at once in a future PR.
For the `List` alias, I don't know. Maybe it's not really justified. But I don't think it's particularly less justified now than before?

> Recall that `List` is an alias for `List Dyn`, thus the `List` contracts only

Reviewer: Using `List` as an alias for `List Dyn`: I feel it has always existed by accident. I'd be keen on removing the alias, for the time being, and see if we actually need it. I'm a bit afraid of being locked in with it after a release. It's a non-trivial complication for dubious gain.

> Recall that `List` is an alias for `List Dyn`, thus the `List` contracts only

Author: I tend to agree, saving 4 chars for a `List Dyn` type or contract that I'm not even sure will be used especially often doesn't sound like a strong motivation.

  │
  ┌─ repl-input-17:2:21
  │
2 │ apply_fun (fun x => "a")
  │                     --- evaluated to this expression
[..]
```

#### Dictionary

The type constructor `{_ : Contract}` represents a record whose field names are not
constrained but whose field values are checked against `Contract`. In practice, the
contract `Contract` is mapped onto each field. Such a contract is useful when using
records as an extensible dictionary, that is a key/value store, where keys are
strings and values respect `Contract`. Example:

```nickel
let occurrences | {_: Num} = {a = 2, b = 3, "!" = 5, "^" = 1} in
occurrences."!"
```

## Laziness

In the [writing a custom contract by hand](#by-hand) section, we noted the
strange fact that a custom contract must return a value, instead of just
returning e.g. a boolean to indicate success or failure. A contract could even
simply return `null`, as failure is handled separately by aborting. Moreover, the
contracts we have written so fare always returned the original unmodified
value upon success, which doesn't sound very useful: after all, the caller and
the interpreter already had access to this value to begin with.

> The motivation for this return value relates to laziness. Nickel is a lazy

Reviewer: Also function contracts.

Author: True, and I thought about bringing that up, but in the end, function contracts are native and their implementation really relevant to the API of user-defined contracts. It turns out we can implement them in user code fully (well that's already half a lie, because they need specific primops for error reporting like `%go_dom%` and `%go_codom%`), but I think the right motivation for the API of user-defined contracts returning a value is to empower users to write lazy contracts. If that's not the case, and it's just for function and built-in contracts, we should arguably have a predicate API for user-defined contracts, and keep the return-value representation as an internal implementation detail.

Reviewer: I see your angle.

That being said, there is an argument to make as to whether contracts are like this because Nickel has lazy values, or whether Nickel has lazy values because contracts need it.

Author: It's true that the text is implying a stronger causal ordering "lazy evaluation => lazy contracts" when it is rather "we want lazy configurations => lazy evaluation /\ lazy contracts". Will try to tame it down in the next pass.

Author: Reworded this part to shift the focus from "lazy evaluation" to "laziness" as a more general property.

be requested.

Finally, we sequence the result with `check_fields`: if we remove this last line
and return the mapped value directly, because Nickel is lazy and `check_fields`
is not used elsewhere, the check wouldn't actually trigger. Using `seq` first
forces the evaluation of `check_fields` unconditionally, ignores the resulting
value and continues with the second argument (here, our wrapped `value`).

Let us see if we indeed preserved laziness:

```
nickel>let config | NumBoolDict = {
    "1" = 1 + "a", // Same as our previous "fail"
    "0" | doc "Some information" = true,
}
nickel>:query config."0"
* value: true
* documentation: Some information
```

Yes! Our contract doesn't unduly cause the evaluation of the field `"1"`. Does
it check anything, though?

```
nickel>let config | NumBoolDict = {
  not_a_number = false,
  "0" | doc "Some information" = false,
}
nickel>:q config."0"
error: contract broken by a value [field name `not_a_number` is not a number].
[..]

nickel>let config | NumBoolDict = {
  "0" | doc "Some information" = "not a boolean",
}
nickel>:q config."0"
error: contract broken by a value [field `0` is not a boolean].
[..]
```

It does!

> **Remark: lazy, always?**

Reviewer: Why is this not a level 4 heading?
```suggestion
#### Remark: lazy, always?
```

Note that our check for field names is not lazy in the sense that even when
requesting another field `"0"`, we've already triggered this check for all field
names. This is totally fine: early error reporting is a good thing, as long we
don't force the evaluation of something that wouldn't be evaluated without the
contract. The field names of a record are readily available and don't incur any
evaluation, so we can check for them directly. We could also have put this check
inside each field, along the `Bool` contract application, making it lazy. But we
prefer to report this error as soon as possible.

> **Conclusion**

Reviewer: In which case, you would also have

```suggestion
#### Conclusion
```

    value <= max) in
// alternative without from_predicate
let BetweenAlt = fun min max label value =>
  if builtins.is_num value &&
     value >= min &&
     value <= max then
    value
  else
    contracts.blame label in
let MyConfig = {
  level | Between 5 10,
  strength | Between 0 1,
}
```

### Contracts parametrized by contracts

Contracts parametrized by other contracts are not really special among
parametrized contracts, but note that although contracts can be functions, we
will see soon that they can be different objects as well. Even with functions,
contract application behaves slightly differently than bare function
application. Thus, when manually handling a contract `contract`, do not apply it
as a function `contract label value`, but use `contracts.apply`:
`contracts.apply contract label value`. One example of such a contract is a
`Nullable` contract, that accepts a value that is either null or of some other
given format:

```nickel
let Nullable = fun contract label value =>
  if value == null then
    value 
  else
    contracts.apply contract label value in
// succeeds
null | Nullable Num
// succeeds too
1 | Nullable Num
```

## Compound contracts

> In this section, we review the different ways of composing existing contracts
> together to create new ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes the different ways of composing existing contracts
together to create new ones.
```
